***Witchcraft, Violence, and Democracy in South Africa***

In beginning of 2005 Adam Ashforth published Witchcraft, Violence, and
Democracy in South Africa. Ashforth teaches in the Center for
Afro-American and African Studies at the University of Michigan. In 1990
Ashforth visited South Africa to research the politics of the transition
to democracy in relation to his first book, The Politics of Official
Discourse in Twentieth-century South Africa. When is friends invited him
to stay at Soweto. Soweto is an urban area of Johannesburg city in
Gauteng, South Africa. When living in Soweto, he realized that his
original plan research the transition to democracy failed to address two
isues. First, that the common occurrence of violence, in the absence of
"the everyday sense of justice that comes from living in security under
a legitimate regime". And secondly that the omnipresence of witches. He
studied there for thirty-six months going back and forth from Soweto to
United States from August 1992 to October 1994. He was adopted into a
Soweto family and was treated like their own son.

\
\

Soweto's population is around million and a half people. It stretches
about twelve miles from the Johannesburg city center to cover an area
about thirty miles. "Name coined in 1963 to encompass townships
southwest of Johannesburg (21) Million and a half people, living in 30
square miles; majority of population under age 30 (21-22)." Soweto is a
typically modern, multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, youthful place with only
seven percent of people over sixty. Most Sowetans are poor and about
sixty percent of households earn less than Rand (ZAR) one thousand five
hundred per month, which is approximately one hundred and five dollars.

Most Sowetans do not have a regular or permanent job to support their
families. Unemployed Sowetans have to compete with migrants from rural
areas and neighboring states. Employers openly hold prejudice against
Sowetans young men stating that they are "lazy and unreliable" (30). It
is easier for many employers to his hire illegal immigrants because they
can be paid less than minimal wage. "About half of all adults are
financially dependent to some extent, and at least some of the time, on
others, when, according to the prevailing norms of adulthood, they
should not be" (28). Many of them depend on the pension their parents
receive. Also, it is not strange over parents to share their pension
with their children or grandkids.

\
\

The book is divided into three parts. The first part is about "social
dimensions of spiritual insecurity in Soweto"(1) at the start of the
twenty-century. He explores the town's daily life and their influence on
the residents' belief in witchcraft. The residents believe that the
source of witchcraft is jealousy. The second part deals with the
different dimensions and likely causes of Sowetans' spiritual
insecurity, offering a more insightful explanation of witchcraft's
social foundations in the society. The third part, "Spiritual Insecurity
and State," examines the conflicting relationship between witchcraft and
the separation of state, and the challenges that spiritual insecurity
presents to the democratic government. As stated by Ashforth "No one can
understand life in Africa without understanding witchcraft" (xiii). All
three parts relate to the topic of witchcraft involved in the daily life
of Soweto people. This easy only focuses on part one of the book.

\

The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology of the
South African parliament reported its public hearings on "a Bill on the
protection and promotion of Indigenous Knowledge Systems" (7). During
the investigation the committee was warned not to confuse traditional
medicine with witchcraft. The healers told the committee that
traditional medicine is used for protection purposes while witches
intentions are to harm and kill people. Also, all suffering doesn't come
from witches but it is often the cause. How often is not addressed in
the public hearings. Diseases like HIV and AIDS are related to
witchcraft. Symptoms of AIDS like coughing, abdominal pains, and
diarrhea are associated with witchcraft. In Zulu the term *idliso*is
used to refer to poison or being poisoned. Witches used muthi, a medium
between the witch and the victim. The methods muthi used are similar to
the symptoms of AIDS. Not everyone things that witchcraft is the cause
for HIV, however, misfortune is a concept of witchcraft.

\
\

Soweto is a close-knit society and there is plenty of gossip. When
talking about someone's suffering the word witchcraft is never used, but
it is implied that a person is suffering because of witchcraft. MaMfete
or Ashforth’s mother in Soweto stated that "this thing [witchcraft]
comes from a bitterness in somebody's heart, like a poison, causing
jealousy and hatred. And you can never know what’s inside someone's
heart. Truly, you never know" (13). MaMfete is explaining that everyone
has barriers/secrets and you can never really tell who is the witch. It
can be anyone including your spouse. People gossip because they are
tempted to break the barriers of secrecy.

\
\

Witchcraft is product and subject of gossip in the Soweto society.
Gossip helps people analysis their neighbors and friends to see what is
hidden inside their hearts. The advantage of gossip is that it promotes
communities to get closer. To be apart of community you have to know who
are the witches and talk about them with out mentioning their names.
“Gossip cements and circumscribes social networks through the sharing of
secrets about witches, who are understood to possess secret knowledge”
(67). Men tend to use physical violence while women use invisible
forces. “Older women are most susceptible to jealousy because of their
dependency” (75), but, older women often support more dependents than
they should, through their pensions is used by other people and this may
result in resentment against them.

\
\

When Chief Pakati came to power he declared, "Let government beware in
lest protect murders at the expense of innocent people" (15). In other
words, shouldn't the government protect its people from witches the same
way it protects them from murderers. Democrats face challenge here
because the have to respond to witchcraft as ordinary crime without
compromising the democrats ideals of human rights. Also, democrats who
deny the existence of witchcraft will be risking being alienated by the
citizens. This puts the leaders in a tight spot because if they ignore
witches they will be identified as agents of evil forces. The leaders
also have to uphold human rights while not being recognized as witch
protectors. It is government’s job to be the security for the people. In
Soweto, security is *tshiriletso;*meaning to "to conceal from view".
They believed that the ancestors provided protraction from the invisible
forces not the government.

\
\

Soweto is also a very dangerous place. "Each year, according to the
police statics, more than a thousand people are murdered in or around
Soweto. Approximately 13,000 violent assaults are reported to the police
each year and 2,500 or more rapes" (40). These are main reasons for
sense of insecurity in Soweto. All this violent acts create hardships,
misfortune and suffering that demand clarification. No one in Soweto
takes physical protection seriously because the authority is never
contacted or can be bribed. In one example Ashforth conveys his friends
story, "When a friends mother had a beer bottle broken over her head by
a drinking partner with whom she had fallen out, for example she laid a
charge at the police station against the other women. She had no husband
in the house or grown sons, so he felt she had no choice. The next day
her assailant's sons and their friends paid my friend and her family a
visit, brandishing guns and demanding the assault charge be dropped.
Knowing that evened they did not follow through on their threat to
shoot, the boys could easily bribe the police to "lose" the docket, my
friend's mother agreed to accept one hundred rand (equivalent to about
fifteen dollars at the time) to cover medical expenses" (39). This is as
far as the physical protection form the police goes. You can expect
justice to hold an assailant and nothing else.

\
\

Sowetans believe that there are two primary reasons to harm a person by
physical means or by invisible forces. The first is legitimate in Soweto
or a way to discipline someone for his or her wrong doings by using
witchcraft or being violent toward the person. Another reason is "the
desire to compel a person to speak the truth" (50). If violence is used
to make a person confess to a crime then is justifiable as a punishment.
Otherwise it is not justifiable. Ashforth witness something similar to
this in the kangaroo court "one of the community leaders insisted that
he could make the man accused of theft confess by beating him with a
whip fashioned from a car’s fan belt and coat hanger wire" (55). Other
members of the court disagreed with him because even if he beat the
suspect and he confessed "the crime of beating itself would be taken by
the culprit and the community as constituting "payment in full" for the
crime" (55). If they beat him than the court member would not have any
chance of retrieving the stolen goods.

Ashforth tried to take witchcraft as seriously as the people in Soweto.
Ashforth had special bonds with the Soweto people because the Mfete
family adopted him. Also and he refers to people that most and
anthropologists call "informants" as his "friends." He did not provide a
list of interviews and did not record them; meaning that the audience
has to take his explanations essentially on trust. He tried to structure
the book one theme about the relation of occult and politics in
post-apartheid South Africa, but sometimes he gets off topic. He does
not expand on how spiritual insecurity poses a real threat for popular
trust in the African government. It would be easier to understand daily
life and witchcraft if Ashforth had explained the roles of males and
females in the society.

\
\

Ashforth admits that he will never fully understand the society that he
studies. He does not present any definite conclusion about dynamics of
witchcraft, this is not weakness in hos work. Because Ashforth apologize
for being a poor mediator of the conflict between his world, the west,
and Soweto's: "I have tried to leap this chasm without submitting to
belief, without surrendering to the wisdom of those who would teach the
truth about life on the other side" (p. 317). His dream of a life in
which no one in Soweto has to endure the burden of spiritual insecurity,
is satisfactory. Ashforth depicts himself as hanging between two worlds,
the West and Africa. He reflects on his mental bond with what he regards
as "bleak world devoid of deity" (p. 317) that he resides but also
struggles to understand what he regards as his informants' imaginative
worldview. From all the ethnographics read this semester, all the
anthropologists take various stances in respect to their subject of
study, from skepticism to religious conversion. Yet, while many remain
in between belief and disbelief, few tend to elaborate their own
perspectives as clearly as Ashforth does. His interpretation is valuable
as it can help the audience understand the limitations that an
anthropologist encounters in a the field site such as Soweto.

\

While the author does not always succeed in combining the issues of
daily life in Soweto and democratic government, and the book is
sometimes reminiscent of a patchwork quilt of slightly different parts,
it is undoubtedly a good addition to the long tradition of academic
literature on South African witchcraft. The book also clarifies many
issues of post-apartheid society in a thorough and well-informed manner
and Ashforth's personal reflections make it an interesting book a to
read.

\

